Energy Policy 34 (2006) 200–211
How much market do market-based
for the case of ‘‘whi
Ole Langnissa,, Bar
Resea
rlin 1
e 17 S
ficien
investigated for renewable energy, and the EU directive on an emissions-trading scheme for CO2 certificates has been approved in
2003. In contrast, tradable energy efficiency—or ‘‘white’’—certificates have only lately been considered as a market-based tool to
under discussion to contribute to energy-saving and certificates have only been lately celebrated as a market-
racy of information) of the realised savings, and
ARTICLE IN PRESS
www.elsevier.com/locate/enpol
Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF). We would also like to
thank the ECEEE team, Adriaan Perrels and an anonymous reviewer
for helpful comments.0301-4215/$ - see front matter r 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2004.08.025
Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ole.langniss@zsw-bw.de (O. Langniss).
1One exemption is Rader and Norgaard (1996) who adverted to the
applicability of the certificate concept to DSM rather early.climate protection objectives nationally and internation-
ally, and among them are different forms of tradable
certificates. Tradable green certificates for renewable
energy, for example, have been investigated and tested
based tool to foster energy efficiency.1
In this paper, we concentrate on the design of a
system for tradable white certificates and on conditions
for guaranteeing the efficiency of the instrument.
Theoretically, a tradable certificate system will allocate
energy efficiency (EE) activities to the sites with
minimum marginal costs, provided that number of
conditions and principles are met. This includes
additionality of the investment as compared with a
business as usual development, measurability (or accu-
$A much earlier version of this paper was presented at the ECEEE
Summer Study 2003. Ole Langniss held a Marie-Curie Grant of the
European Union (Contract MCFI-2000-01067) at the time of under-
taking the research reported in this article. Barbara Praetorius is
funded via the interdisciplinary research project ‘‘TIPS—transforma-
tion and innovation in power systems’’, funded by the Germanpractice, however, some fundamental problems arise. Critical issues are the design of an efficient artificial market for white
certificates, its compatibility with the European emissions-trading system, the identification of a suitable target group for an EE
obligation and the measurement of energy savings as compared with a reference use of energy. We use the theoretical framework of
transaction cost economics to elaborate these issues. We conclude that transaction costs and investment specificity will restrict
markets for white certificates in practice. Long-term contracts rather than spot trade will be the prevailing form of governance for
EE investments.
r 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Tradable certificates; Energy efficiency; Transaction cost
1. Introduction and theoretical framework
A number of economic and other instruments are
for some time now, and the EU directive on an
emissions-trading scheme (EU ETS) for CO2 certificates
has been approved in 2003. In contrast, tradable whitefoster EE as compared with standards and labelling, for example. Theoretically, there is little doubt about the advantages. InaZSW Centre for Solar Energy and Hydrogen
bDIW Berlin, Be
Available onlin
Abstract
Among the diverse economic instruments to foster energy efinstruments create? An analysis
te’’ certificates$
bara Praetoriusb
rch, Industriestr. 6, Stuttgart 70565, Germany
4195, Germany
eptember 2004
cy (EE) and climate protection, tradable certificates have been
related to high sunk cost, or generic, i.e. easily
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Energy Policy 34 (2006) 200–211 201practicability of the whole trading and verification
system.
In practice, this involves a number of challenges, most
of them related to informational or transaction cost. For
example, before issuing the white certificates, the factual
savings have to be determined. For this purpose, a
reference energy use or baseline without the efficiency
measure has to be determined and compared with the
energy consumption after implementing the efficiency
measure. Aspects, which need to be considered here,
include the problems and consequences of uncertainty
and of leakage (e.g. site-specific ‘‘energy savings’’ by
closing down a plant and importing the energy from
abroad), but also the treatment of the so-called no regret
measures. A further issue is the integration of white
certificates with the EU-wide emissions-trading system.
Altogether, the assessment of potentially efficient de-
signs for a system of tradable white certificates requires
a careful analysis of the problematic issues and
approaches to manage them in practice.
Theoretical starting point for our reasoning is the
concept of transaction cost economics (TCE). TCE
focuses on the choice of an appropriate organisation of
economic activities (in other words: an appropriate
governance structure). It starts from the observation
that information is not complete per se and that the
human capacity to process information is limited.
Improving access to and processing of information is
related to costs. In consequence, human behaviour is
guided by the rule of satisficing rather than optimising.
In this regard, TCE has the same roots like other
scholars of the New Institutional Economics. People
intend to act rational but are bounded by their own
capacities of thinking. Economic actors hence take their
decisions on the basis of imperfect information (Richter
and Furubotn, 1999, p. 510) and bounded rationality
(Simon, 1957, p. 198). The pure existence of bounded
rationality and imperfect information opens the door for
the so-called opportunistic behaviour, a rather euphe-
mistic term for dishonesty, fraud and malice (William-
son, 1987). To summarise, any investment is inevitably
related to additional costs, the so-called transaction
costs. Transaction costs can take one of two forms,
inputs of resources or a margin between the buying and
selling price of a commodity in a given market (Stavins,
1995, p. 134). The former are the direct costs of carrying
out a transaction, i.e. costs for search, information and
contracting, while the latter can be regarded as the
opportunity costs incurred when an efficiency-enhancing
transaction is not realised (Milgrom and Roberts, 1992,
p. 604) The latter, also referred to as governance costs,
stand very much in focus of TCE. We therefore extend
our concept of investment and include transaction costs
as part of the initial investment in an EE measure.
An important concept of TCE is the notion of
O. Langniss, B. Praetorius /investment specificity. Investments can be specific, i.e.transferable to another application. According to
TCE, specific investments allow a more efficient
production than more generic investments (Williamson,
1987). The higher the specificity of the investment the
more will these efficiency gains occur only in the specific
transaction. Thus, specific investments are characterised
by quasi-rents, which can be derived from this invest-
ment in comparison with its next profitable application.
For example, once an insulation has been fixed to a
certain building, it delivers energy savings to the
building user but cannot easily (if at all) be transferred
to another building. It thus loses most of its initial
market value, and the asset owner depends on sufficient
payments by the building user to be able to recover his
sunk costs and to realise the quasi-rent of the specific
investment. The investment is highly specific to the
transaction between the energy service provider and the
building user. In contrast, a CHP-plant has a more
generic character since it is more easily transferable to
other applications.
Investments specific to a certain transaction thus open
the door for opportunism: the quasi-rent is on risk for
opportunistic behaviour by a transaction partner (a
customer, a retailer, etc.). This ‘‘partner’’ may threaten
to refrain from buying the output of the investment and
thus be able to appropriate at least a part of the quasi-
rent. In anticipation of this danger, the asset owner has
an incentive to invest in more generic assets with lower
quasi-rents on risk but possibly also lower efficiency.2
Alternatively, an appropriate governance structure may
be established to safeguard the quasi-rents of specific
investments against opportunistic behaviour (William-
son, 1987). In so doing, efficiency gains due to the
specific investment can be realised, which is compara-
tively profitable for both transaction partners and
increases overall social welfare as compared with low-
efficiency investments.
To conclude, the extent of specificity of investments is
a main determinant for the choice of appropriate
governance mechanisms. The higher the specificity the
more an efficient governance will be characterised by
patterns of hierarchies. Hierarchies can take the form of
a firm or a regulation. They allow for cooperative and
intentional adaptations to changes in the environment,
are connected to stricter accounting and auditing as
administrative controls, and hence imply a lower
incentive intensity. By contrast, low specificity of
investments allows for pure governance by markets
and thus to benefit from theoretically optimal incentive
structures by profit-maximising behaviour. At the same
time, the choice for an appropriate governance structure
is not a choice exclusively between either markets or
2Note that the term’’efficiency’’ is used here in a generic meaning,not exclusively meaning energy efficiency.

